This is a Tape 2 interview with Chuy Hinojosa on
July 29, 1987. We were talking about the sequence
of department heads, which is becoming difficult
to keep straight. Anyway, Gordon Echols was asked
to become interim department head in the fall of
1987. 1985.
Gordon continued in that capacity until the 15th
of December when after he lost his wife he became
incapable of carrying on as department head and
was relieved by the department faculty decided
that it had to have a more active department head
who was capable of carrying on the necessary tasks
that come the way of the department. And so Don
Sweeney, as acting dean, appointed Wolf Roessler
as interim department head, which position he
maintains today. The original degree, we offer,
of course, a master's of urban planning. And then
since then, the doctor of environmental design
has been changed into a PhD. We had the doctor of
environmental design. Then the MSLD, the Master
of Science in Land Development, was instituted
when? That was in 1985. I believe so. It's one year.
full-year 36 credit hour program. 36 credit hour.
Right. With one summer lab. Yes, a whole summer
lab. What course is that? Plan 667. That's when
they apply all they have studied in the fall and
spring, the theory, you know, they apply it in a
laboratory for the whole summer. Usually dealing
with large-scale land development companies.
city projects. What do you view as the future for
the department?
Well, that's a hard question to answer.
I think that the department has been answering the
needs of the field in terms of producing people in
urban planning that are qualified for the field. I
see more more cities now hiring planners for their
own staffs. As the federal government has cut back
on a lot of the funding that before would provide
federal assistance to communities for planning,
I see now communities taking that on themselves.
And the interesting thing is that they're coming
to that conclusion themselves, where they want to
have planning studies done for their
communities. And at least when they're able to,
they hire their own planners afterwards. Many of
our interns who have served in communities for at
least three months, four months, or half a year
have consistently been hired as permanent staff
people in planning departments. So I see that as a
healthy trend that I would hope will continue to
generate a demand for planning. There seems to be
in Texas more of a recognition of the need for
planning, something that we haven't had in the
state. Contrast, say, to California or Florida,
which have much longer experiences with
planning. In fact, they have mandated planning.
As well as Oregon. In Oregon, exactly. And I think
maybe Massachusetts. There are a few states that
have this, but we don't have that in Texas. We have
been a pioneer in that regard here in the state as a
school in establishing a career in a field that is
not as well established and as well understood. So
I think as the state grows and they see the need for
learning what other states have done, there seems
to be an awareness of the need for the field of
planning to be established. And I think we stand a
good chance of providing that support.
Thank you very much for your time and to have an
accurate chronology of your various
planning assignments and your continuing
involvement in planning education. Thank you,
Bob. Yeah, well, one of the things that we forgot to
discuss earlier, and some of the contributions
that have been made by the Department to the State
of Texas and the country, and not only in higher
education, but in public education, It's a short
course that you helped establish in Texas,
remember? The Commissioner's short course. And I
think you had a hand in that with your experience
from California. And suggesting that something
like that would be very valuable here, too. And it
was embraced, and people ran with it. And it's been
now, I don't know how many years now, 14 years or
something it's been offered? Since 1971. 1971, so
that would make it... 16 years. It wasn't too far
off. And that's been a good effort. It came out of
this department and so the faculty member taking
that initiative. And I think you have also
expressed an interest in working with local
public schools. I believe, did you get a grant or
something to Pilot maybe a little program with one
of the local schools to work with young kids and
showing them what the field of planning is about
and what it deals with so they can begin to develop
an understanding. And I think you're right. I
agree that we need to, as a field, communicate more
with the general public in this area so they
understand that the field can offer them
something. For example, when I tell people that
I'm a city planner, they say, well, what's that?
they just are mystified by it. Well, if you think
about it, it's a relatively new field. It really
became formalized, although it's very old in many
ways, too. It became formalized in 1935, I think it
was the first course that was offered at Harvard,
and then in Pennsylvania they were immediately
thereafter in 1936, with the first attempts at
formal curriculums. I think there's a lot of work
to be done in terms of what professional planners
do to make themselves known to the American
public. Very much so. I agree with you. In fact, I
made similar suggestions on the board of APA that
we should communicate more with the general
public and less with ourselves. We do a lot of
talking amongst ourselves, but not enough with
you. Yes, you're right. I think that's an
important area that has to be worked on.
Yeah. End of interview. This is August 3rd, 1987.
This is Bob Cornish. We're in my office, and I'm
interviewing Jim Gardner. Jim, First of all, go
over your education in planning, where you went to
school, and any comments you want to make about
that.
Well, I think getting into the planning education
program was an outgrowth of my being in an
architectural program at USC, University of
Southern California. and being exposed to a
person who stimulated me, as well as a lot of
others, Cy Eisner, Simon Eisner, who, as you know,
is the, along with Gallion, who happened to be the
dean at the time of the school of architecture,
wrote The Urban Pattern, and took one class from
him, one of those overview classes that all
architects were supposed to take. And it got me
thinking about going into graduate school. And I
checked on them, Cal, USC, Berkeley.
I looked into some of the other programs,
including MIT. And
I qualified. I don't know why.
the normal MIT type would be, I don't think. But the
program was pretty
non-technically oriented, due to the nature of
the main faculty, Adams, Howard, and Greeley, who
were a firm, incidentally, as you know, a
consulting firm, and had quite a wide practice in
the wing. That was Jack Howard? Yeah.
What year was that? 1952,
I
believe. Yellow pipe. I could look it up, but I
don't know. All right. Whatever. And spent two
years in graduate school, which was a good
experience for me, you know, personally. Just
being in New England with my wife. And came back to
California, where I had been the better part of my
youth. And got a position in San Bernardino as the
third man on a three-man staff. and for the city yes
Dick Garrett was my immediate superior very a good
person and a good planner I think I disagree with
some of the directions that the program is going
but that had nothing to do with the fact that I was
lucky to get a opportunity to go to Stockton a year
after I'd been in in San Bernardino, and became a
member of the staff under Stan Ott. When he
resigned, I was selected as the planning
director. What year was that?
That would have been about 55, 54, 55.
I was in Mill Valley at that time. Yeah, right. I
occasionally ran into you in the AIP meetings.
Yeah. Yeah, the Northern California section. And
I stayed in Stockton for about 10 years, I guess. 10
years as planning director. That's quite a long
time. Yeah, it was. Went through one of the early
urban renewal programs that
We worked with,
I'll drop another name. I can't think of it right
now. John Hurt. John Hurt. H-I-R-T-O-N. E-N. E-N.
He was one of the early bright young boys in urban
renewal. Was he with the Chamber of Commerce
originally in Stockton? No, I don't believe so. He
was selected by the, I was interim head of the urban
renewal program. They didn't have a formal
director for about a year. So as planning
director, I sort of took over that duty also. We
went to, I went to a conference, a narrow
conference, I believe it was in St. Louis or
someplace. And we heard about this young boy,
young man who... N-A-H-R-O. Right. A young fellow
who had been working with one of the well-known
programs in Little Rock, Arkansas. I can't think
of the director. At that time, he was a biggie. And
so we were lucky, I thought, and it turned out he did
a good job in Stockton, John, and went on to become
UMTA and all those things in Washington and
subsequently Spur in San Francisco and that. But
get back to my historical background in planning.
I left Stockton when an opportunity came up for a
chance to work for a large quote-unquote
engineering planning firm, Wilsingham and
Blair, which later became Wilsingham, and spent
two years there and became acquainted with such
notable planners as Jesus Hinojosa, Robert
Cornish, Joseph McGraw, and others. few others
who didn't make it to A&M. It was sort of a breeding
ground for, as it turned out, a sizable portion of
the planning faculty later on at Texas A&M. And it
really comprised the original faculty entirely.
True. I was probably the first full-time faculty,
if you exclude the fact that Joe McGraw was here
first as the only paid help after having started
the program with the help of then-President
General Rutter and most effectively, Edward
Romanek, who Joseph McGraw had worked with and
gone to school with, I believe, earlier. I think in
Oklahoma. Yeah. And interestingly enough, Joe,
in his previous experience at A&M, taught to
undergrad Jesus or Chewie in architecture.
So we all had sort of an architectural background.
In fact, we all did. All sort of us. Yeah, right.
Which you would think had given the program a
pretty sharp, definite, physical direction. But
because of the nature of it, the four that I
mentioned, which were basically the faculty for
the first 10 years,
we didn't overemphasize that. I don't think
consciously, but it just, particularly when I
joined the faculty in 66,
Joe had started the program with six students, one
of which was a former neighbor in San Bruno,
California, that he solicited to come. Who was
that? Mike Harney. Mike Harney? You remember him,
don't you? And incidentally, among the six first
students were one of the few blacks that's gone
through the program. I was thinking the other day
that since there were six students, we had Some 16
percent of the student body were minority blacks.
It was just higher than the history of the program
or the history of A&M. Is Mike black? No. This was
Wendell Smith. Oh, Wendell, yeah. Whose father
was dean at Prairie View at the time. Yeah, of
engineering. Yeah. Well, was he in the first
class? Either the first or second, very close to
it. Well, you know, Wendell was responsible for me
being at A&M. No, I didn't know that. Oh, yes.
Should I tell you how that happened? I think that's
pertinent to the paper. Sure. Joe McGraw, when
Wendell graduated, he told Wendell to get out of
Texas, that he had no future in Texas. He should go
to California. And when he got to California, he
suggested that he look up some of Joe's old
friends, and I was one of them. So Wendell called me
on the telephone and invited me to dinner. And they
were living in Menlo Park, East Menlo Park, which,
of course, is all black. And also there at that same
meeting was Cliff Graves and his wife. And Cliff
had just returned from Washington, DC, where he
had been looking for housing. as he had been
appointed an assistant to the director of Bureau
of Management and Budget in the Nixon
administration.
So there were four blacks and one white at Denrick.
And it was the first time I had been a minority. And
it was really quite funny because they had gone
around the table and everybody was talking about
what they'd been doing lately and Cliff had and his
wife, both very elegant people by the way, and
Cliff is currently the county administrator for
San Diego County. Cliff was enumerating the
various amusing circumstances that they face
when they got to Washington looking for housing as
blacks. Because with his salary level, they could
afford almost anything. And the very trumped-up
stories they'd get when they looked at
high-quality housing. And then it came my turn to
say what I'd been doing lately. And I announced
that I had resigned from ABAC the week before. And
Wendell very seriously said, Bob, what is the
region ever going to do without you? At which I
laughed hysterically and said, the region will
never even know I'm gone. But I had hoped to study
landscape architecture privately and race my
sailboat seriously and do some gardening and drop
out for a couple of years, which at the time I could
afford to do. And so apparently Wendell called Joe
at Texas A&M and said, hey, this guy's on the loose.
You better get a calling to him. And so that's what
happened. So it's because we're black that I'm
here at A&M.
And I've talked with Wendell several times
subsequently, and they're doing very well. And
he's turned out to be an excellent planner. He's
working for us. HEW in the San Francisco office
now. He went to Union City first, I think. Yeah. As a
planner. Yeah. And was there about a year, and the
planning director left, and they pushed him into
the role of acting planning director, and I told
him not to take it unless they gave him the salary
and the title to go with the responsibility. And he
then forced their hand, and he did become the
planning director. which was quite something to
be a black and a planning director, even in
California in those days. But then he left and went
to HUD in the San Francisco regional office, and
did some good work for HUD, and then went on to HEW in
terms of civil rights and that sort of thing.
You're still in San Francisco? Still, and they're
living in Fremont, as far as I know.
We had some interesting people back in those days,
to say the least. In fact, I was thinking the other
day about the difference in the kinds of students
from the early, say, 20 years ago. And today,
although I haven't been in the last two or three
years that close to the students, I have taught a
class, and I have a rough idea of what some of them
are like, today's students are like. In some
respects, it's a little disappointing, because I
think most of us, what I mean, the early faculty,
let's call them the four horsemen,
were fairly activist-oriented.
not, what's the word I'm thinking of, the old
advocacy types necessarily, because all
planning was advocacy, and you're not a planner
unless you're advocating something. But anyway,
we were all fairly active, and our students, I
think, made us that way, even if we didn't want to be
in it, They were oriented toward what was going on
in the world. And this was the late 60s that I
started. So there was still that feeling from the,
that characterized the 60s now. The era of social
unrest. Right. And consciousness, social
consciousness among the students was much more
evident than it is, I think, today. And that's not
necessarily bad. That's a reflection of the
country, obviously, and the nature of society
generally today. But I think we missed a little
something. For instance, we are missing it now. We
had the two cities had a group, maybe you remember
it, called Twin City
I'm thinking it's mission because there is such a
thing, but it was a Twin City organization. I don't
know what, that's not important. But it was a
spinoff or an outgrowth of the Martin Luther King
assassination, and I can't think of when that was,
but it was a little later on in the period, where
this informal group of not necessarily all black,
but just all people who were interested in
bettering social conditions, got together on a
local level, two cities. Of course, Bryan has, as
had then as it has now, a predominance of black
people. And the college station had, obviously,
the students. And the two got along pretty well,
the two groups. They did some interesting things.
That was also the time where I believe where some of
our students along with the primary stimulus I
think was architecture students got this house
loaned to them over there in the east side of town
and put some sweat into it and build a thing. It
never really came off. It was called Cisco. Right.
It had good intentions. They were doing it in other
parts of the country. Yeah, community design
centers. Yeah, design centers. It never came off
as well as it might have. But to me, an example of
what isn't happening today. You know, I took a
group of architecture students back to Howard
University. And when I was here, my first year in
the Department of Architecture, I became the
faculty lead on the Cisco project. Oh, you did?
Yeah. I went back to Howard with them for a
conference of all the people from around the
country that were involved with community design
centers. And that provided some real stimulus to
the program here. And that continued for another
couple of years, and then it just sort of fell by the
wayside.
I'm not sure where in the sequence. I was, again,
thinking of how the outreach type thing
manifested itself in two other things. One was,
that I can recall, one was a proposal to locate a
high school and college station. which had a lot of
planning implications, we thought. And so the
faculty, I think maybe they were just Joe and I at
that time, took a pretty strong position and we
went to the meetings and had great arguments with
the people on the other side. And the students did
too. They made up brochures and handed them out and
flyers and handed them out. And we had a great
rapport with the faculty and students on an issue
outside of the classroom. Another one was an
effort by, of course, that issue was finally
decided by Bill Finch. Yeah. We simply gave the
site to the city, or the school board, in effect,
and claimed that the other site, which we thought
was better, couldn't be obtained because it was a
little old lady who Pappy said, Daddy said, always
stay with the land that you live in. You don't have
any problems at all. Anyway, another one was even
more interesting, I think, because it got really
into some serious politics, namely university.
When the university wanted to set up an airport
authority, and Joe at that time, Joe McGraw had
been had run for council and been elected. I think
the first time he ran, he was not elected. And he was
elected and called for, because they were going to
tie in the two cities and the county, but not give
them the proper authority. The university was
still going to run the show, but the tax base was
going to be from the cities. Anyway, it's too
complicated to get into here. But subsequently,
he got it to he and others to the point where they had
to have a referendum on it, and they turned it down.
And the faculty and students were quite active
outwardly on that issue too. We don't want to get
into it probably, but it led to interesting
subsequent events regarding Joe McGraw's career
as head of the department. It ended up saving the
taxpayers quite a bit of money. Yeah. I think the
fact that it's been now 10 or 12 years and they got
along fine without it shows something. No, it was a
bad thing. Not terribly bad, but it just
didn't make good sense. So, what courses were you
responsible for when you got here? And you were
here in 1965? Six. I think Joe started the program
in 65, and I came the next year. And you were number
two on the faculty. Well, I like to say I was number
one, but he was administrator and faculty. And
then after you, it was Chewy. I don't know whether
it was Chewy or you. I lost track. I think Chewie was
here in the summer of 1969, and I arrived in
October. And then he left right away for South
America, Central and Latin America. Yeah, Chile.
Yeah. Well, to answer your question, which was
what? What did classes that I- Yeah, what part of
the curriculum did you handle? I think I, at that
time, we stressed what we call labs more, the six
unit practical courses in applied planning, if
you will. And one of the earliest was,
interestingly enough, a plan for Texas City. We
called it a preliminary plan, and it was.
It stimulated, I think, planning, well, more
intensive planning down there. And it just
happens that they came back a couple of years ago.
Julie and I were involved with Texas City again on
sort of another plan, an update. But
interestingly out of that, it might be
interesting that This triggered quite a concern,
it seems, by our colleagues in the, at that time,
the American Institute of Planners, AIP, in that
the college here using student labor was doing
planning
that should be done by consultants. We had made it
very clear that these were not professional,
quote unquote, plans, both to the client and to
anybody that wanted to ask about it. And it went so
far as that they had a big brouhaha, and I wrote an
answer to it which was pretty favorably received.
I can't find it nowadays, but in which I quoted the
fact that the profession in there Constitution or
whatever it is at that time, said that one of their
responsibilities was to work with students, give
to students. And it all worked out pretty well. And
my main point was that... And they had an
educational responsibility as a chapter. Right.
As they do now, as you well know, having them
involved. But as it turned out, I think we What we
said was that this will probably stimulate more
work for consultants. It turned out Texas City did
hire a consultant later, as well as a lot of other
cities. But what I want to point out is that we early
on took the so-called hands-on approach of
so-called real-life situation and used that. in
the lab. I taught those. I also sort of specialized
in the plan implementation. I was one of the West
Coast, being one of the West Coast group, was a
disciple of the comprehensive physical plan,
more or less, without getting into the
implications of the other aspects of it. and tried
to embody that in both the lab and implementing the
plan. I might add that Joe McGraw took the first
plunge and became a councilman. I think I
mentioned that earlier. And I was appointed
fairly early on to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and put in four years there and then I
decided to get some experiences being one of the
decision makers and ran for city council and
served two terms. And what I'm reciting that for is
to sort of reinforce the fact that my one of my keen
interests is in the political aspects of planning
and the implementation of it. How do you make the
plan work? In the accreditation team visit, it was
pointed out that our curriculum was somewhat
short on the political and implementation
aspects of planning education. And it seems to me
that that was one of your contributions, that you
seemed to be able to bring to the department an
interest in public policy that other faculty
members didn't. I mean, that seemed to be your
particular interest. Well, I appreciate your
keen awareness
of that. Well, I took it at a pretty basic level.
I wouldn't lay claim to being any kind of a
policymaker, except as the plan makes policy. And
that we want the politicians to lay out, either
through the plan or their own platform, their own
agenda, whatever, some sort of guidelines for the
future and stick to them and make them
accountable. To me, that's the politics of
planning. You get things done. Well, then you
served two terms on the council and then you went
off the council. Yeah, we flip-flopped around, we
the city, I'm speaking of, between having a total
at-large election to award system, or a
combination of both. I wasn't too happy with that.
And so I just bowed out for about nine years. But
during that nine years, I ran three times
unsuccessfully. I shouldn't mention that to
posterity, but that's the case. And then last
April, April 87, I ran again and made it. help some
of my friends. And a new mayor. Right. So now you're
on the council again, doing good works for College
Station. Well, we haven't done much. Of course,
it's only been three months or so, but there
haven't been any major issues as there were during
that interim, like the location of a plant.
without too much planning thought into an
establishment of a supposedly high-tech
industrial park, which is yet to see any industry
at all. That being one of my favorite issues that I
ran on. Of course I lost on it three times, but I
finally I'm not sure that it was for that reason,
but maybe it was. It suffered from a lack of any kind
of planning, really. Looking at the department
now that you are on a, what shall I say, a leisure
schedule here, teaching about one class a year, is
it? That's right. And you're essentially
looking, your point of view is different. How
would you characterize any changes that have
occurred in the department in terms of planning
education and its administration and its
offering and so forth?
Without getting too specific, I think it's a
reflection of
the people who are the head of the department. I
think some of the things that went on early on were
pretty much a reflection of the leaders and the
faculty, and particularly the students. Do you
realize that at one time you and I were the only
persons on the faculty who had not served as
department head? Yeah. And so there have been
changes, as you know, in the last 20 years, and I'm
speaking of that time span being my tenure, more or
less. So not only did The times change and the
students change, but the leadership of the
program changed. And it's to be expected that
there'd be a reflection or a re-emphasis or an
emphasis on
not only our administration in the department,
but other administrative levels of the
university. principally the college, and of
course we've gone through a lot of changes in the
deanship, too.
Well, that leads to certain instability and
concern for what the future is going to be of not
only our department, but the college. You know, we
started as a part of of the engineering college,
which was a good stable. That was the place to be at
that time if you wanted the money and the stability
and the power. Of course, some of that has shifted
now to other colleges. Once we got our own college,
things changed too.
A major thing, of course, and again, as I think I
mentioned earlier on in this discussion, the
students are a reflection of our national
condition.
And we have to expect change. As I said when I talked
to you earlier, I'm not as close to the students
because I only teach the one class once a year. And
then, of course, now we have expanded from the MUP
degree into a PhD and an MSLD. And a lot of students
that I see out here today are not MUP students.
They're MSLD students. And they're different.
They have different expectations and different
professional goals. And they're different kinds
of folks than the MUP students are. and that's
again to be expected they come from different
backgrounds and they certainly are looking for
quite different things out of their practice when
they leave here there aren't many of us on
on the faculties of the different departments in
the university that are not a PhD, PhD level as you
know. And not many realized that at the time we, you
and I, and a few others came into it, there was no PhD
program anywhere. And I think Don Foley, I don't
think he got it in planning from UC, I think it was
sociology or something. So That's right. He was
the first person I called doctor, academically.
But now the emphasis is on research, a lot of it,
which goes along with the PhD
program and requirement for being a member of the
faculty. Research and publication. And we could
spend another hour on that.
Well, it has changed. The
person without a Ph.D. has almost no chance of
being admitted to higher education today.
It's simply not possible to join a faculty without
it. Whereas I think you're quite right. When we
were in the process of moving from practice into
education, there was no way of getting a PhD in
planning. And in fact, if you look at this faculty
today, there isn't one person on this faculty that
has a PhD in planning.
They're in something else. Economics in the case
of Stover, or jurisprudence in the case of Pugh, or
a foreign doctorate from Germany in the case of
Wolfgang.
And I guess that Sherry Boehm has a PhD
centered around health care from the University
of Michigan.